---
title: "Overnight hike at Zaleski with record mileage"
date: "2014-05-30"
---

<img src="/img/zaleski/IMG_1047.JPG" class="img-left" />
I took my son, Justin, on a backpacking trip to Zaleski State Park in
Ohio. I have been trying to do a two night, weekend long backpacking
trip for a while. Something always throws a wrench in the plans. This
trip was no exception. Here's the two big points of the weekend.
First, we did a personal record of 15 miles of backpacking in a single
day. Second, I didn't particularly enjoy Zaleski as a backcountry
destination.

## The Plan

Here's my ideal weekend backpacking trip. Leave after work on Friday,
hike a short ways and camp that night. Hike all day Saturday and camp
that night. Hike Sunday a short ways back to the cars and drive home.
I've tried this plan on several occasions and never been able to pull
it off.

Zaleski is broken up into three loops: South, Middle, and North. The
South loop is a total of 10 miles and has two camp sites. The third
camp site is at the intersection of the Middle and North loops.
Technically, you're only allowed to camp at the designated sites.
However, the spacing of the sites is a little odd for the distances.

The first camp is only about two miles from the trail head. This is
perfect for a Friday night camp site. The second site is only about
four miles from the first camp site. That's much too close for the
second night's camp site. However, the third camp site is another 6
1/2 miles (or 10 1/2 miles from the first site). Justin and I have
never hiked that far in a day and I wasn't sure we could. So I figured
we'd hike the Southern loop and then as far up the Middle loop as we
could and stealth camp somewhere along the way. That'd leave us 6 - 7
miles to hike the rest of the Middle loop back to the cars on Sunday.

## The Facts

We did make the first camp site pretty easily Friday night. Along the
short hike we passed a young couple that had stopped and setup their
camp almost right in the middle of the trail. So much for stealth
camping. When we got to the designated site, there were already three
other groups camping. We found a spot and setup camp. By the time we
left in the morning there were a total of 8 groups camping at the
designated site.

Justin slept in my new Warbonnet Blackbird XLC. It uses cinch buckles
and straps for suspension; couldn't be easier to setup. Justin had no
problems getting setup himself. I was sleeping with my own hammock and
bugnet I had made. No chance of rain, so we didn't bother setting up a
tarp. My hammock has whoopie slings for suspension. I'd never hung it
outdoors before and I'd never hung my bugnet. Both gave me quite a bit
of problems getting adjusted. Overall, it took me about 30 minutes to
get setup Friday night. However, I did get it hung well and slept
wonderfully. I really enjoyed the more open feeling of the hammock and
separate bugnet. I'm really looking forward to using this setup more.

Saturday we got up at a fairly decent time. We finished some oatmeal
breakfast and were packed up by 9:00am. The hike to the second camp
site went pretty well. We finished the 4.5 miles in about 2 hours.
This was probably the most enjoyable of all the miles we hiked that
day. It was somewhat remote even though we saw several groups out hiking.

There was water on tap at the site and we cooked lunch of ramen
noodles. Justin was pretty pleased with how quickly we were hiking. He
was confident we could make it all the way to the third campsite. The
second half of the South loop was a little tough. I was hiking in my
Merrell trail running shoes instead of boots. It was an experiment in
lighter footwear. Unfortunately, there were a couple miles along a
fire service road that was gravel paved. The rocks were pretty hard on
my thin soled shoes.

We intersected with the Middle loop and started heading up towards the
third camp site. This section of the trail was also tough; lots of ups
and downs. The trail is pretty much straight line, so any hills just
have to be climbed. After two hours of hiking I was pretty tired. We'd
done 8.5 miles so far and I was ready to stop. My original plan had
been to stealth camp at about this distance. But Justin was anxious to
get to the camp.

After one particularly brutal hill, I just pulled off the trail and
setup my hammock. I told him I just needed a break for a bit. It was
still early afternoon and we were nearly to our final destination. I
setup and didn't get a fantastic hang. I definitely slept for at least
30 minutes. I woke up to a carpenter bee loudly buzzing near me. I
didn't think much of it, but then noticed my bug net wasn't hung quite
right. Given enough persistence the bee could definitely fly into my
bug net.

With determination, I got up to finish the hike into the third
campsite. Meanwhile, Justin had also setup his hammock and had been
laying there studying the map. He figured at our current pace and
remaining daylight we could finish the entire Middle loop before dark
and go home tonight. I told him quite clearly (and maybe too sharply)
I wasn't going to do that. I wanted to camp two nights and I felt like
that was too much mileage. He was sullen for the remaining two miles
towards camp.

Once we got there, the site was crowded. We actually couldn't find a
clear site to setup. I ended up pulling out my hand saw and clearing
thorn bushes from around a few trees for us to hang. Justin was
still quite sullen while I was clearing the site. He setup his hammock
easily and crawled in. I once again fought with my setup to get a good
hang. I was tired, hot, and very sweaty. I managed to get my hammock
setup so I could rest, but I was only about 6 inches off the ground. I
knew I'd have to fiddle with it more to get a good enough setup to
sleep in.

Meanwhile, there's all this hussle and bussle around us. Lots of
20-somethings going about making their own camp sites with quite a bit
of ruckus. I could also clearly hear road traffic and trucks with
their stupid engine brakes. There was nothing relaxing about laying
there in a poor hammock hang listening to all the noise while watching
my own son sulk in his hammock.

Looking at the map, I could see it was about 4.5 miles back to the
car. We'd held a pretty steady hiking pace of 2 miles/hr and we had
about three hours of daylight left. So I decided to hike back to the
cars. We packed up and headed out. I didn't take time to make dinner.
I figured we'd eat when we got to the cars. It was 6:00pm when we set
out.

That hike back to the cars was hard. Rather than finish the Middle
loop, we back-tracked right over the trail we'd just hiked. That saved
us about a mile. When we intersected with the South loop we took a
connector trail back to the cars. Honestly, I think that connector
trail might have been the best scenery we had on the entire hike. But
I was just too tired to appreciate it at all.

We made it to the cars just after 8:00pm. That's a total of 15 miles
in a total of 11 elapsed hours. I was completely soaked with sweat.
Justin and I both changed clothes into something dry. We then ate
several packets of tuna fish cold and several granola bars. We made it
home and I was in bed by 11:30 that night.

## The Good

Clearly this trip was a great workout. There's not a lot of places
near Cincinnati where you can string together 15 miles of backpacking
trails. I've been running a lot lately to get back into shape. I could
really tell a difference on this hike versus the one a few weeks
earlier on [Archers Fork Trail](/posts/2014-03-29-aft.html). This was
a hard hike, but I felt better while doing it.

<img src="/img/zaleski/scarlet-tanager.jpg" class="img-right" />
We
had some good scenery. I wouldn't say it was the norm, but sections of
the trail were very nice. I saw a Scarlet Tanager songbird for (I
think) the first time; not that I'm a bird watcher. It was just very
pretty and caught my eye. Justin found a very small corn snake on the
trail. I don't see too many snakes while hiking, so that was cool too.

I think this was a good confidence builder for Justin. It was very
physical and he handled it well. He was also able to manage his own
gear quite well: setup, tear down, packing, and carrying.

## The Bad

I was quite disappointed with Zaleski. It didn't seem like the trail
was actually maintained. It was easy to follow simply because of how
many people were constantly walking on it. But the trail could have
used some work. There were several more miles than I would have liked
hiking along the fire roads. Those miles weren't pretty or enjoyable
at all. I didn't enjoy how many miles we hiked literally within eye
sight of a highway.

I feel like Zaleski is a mockery of the backcountry. I go backpacking
because I like to get away into remote places that are quiet. I'm an
introvert by nature and I have a job that requires quite a bit of
socialization. Going to the backcountry is a way for me to escape the
constant pressure of "man" around me.

Zaleski looks like the backcountry because there are trails and woods.
But it is in no way remote. There is almost no time where you are away
from other people. The weekend was a "success" in that I went camping
and hiked my most miles ever. But it wasn't a success because I didn't
come home feeling refreshed and connected the way I usually do. I came
home feeling like I wanted to immediately schedule another trip. The
fix wasn't enough.

## My Conclusions

I'm glad I went. Any time I get to spend with my son in the woods is
time well spent. I'm proud of the physical accomplishment of hiking 15
miles in a day with a fully loaded pack.

I won't be going back to Zaleski. I don't think it's the place for me.
I also don't think I'll try to schedule any more two night trips for
Justin. I'm pretty sure he enjoys backpacking with me, but I'm also
pretty sure he doesn't enjoy it enough for two nights.
