---
title: "Getting Started in Backpacking"
date: "2013-05-01"
---
Backpacking has always been attractive to me. Even still the cost of
getting started had kept me away for many years.

My wife and I took our four kids car camping a few times. It was fun.
The kids enjoyed it. But it was so much work. We would pack so much
stuff.

One day I was in a local outfitter. I don't remember why I was there,
maybe just to blow off steam by looking around. I knew very little
about backpacking, but figured the tent as one of the heaviest parts
of a kit and was asking about it. The salesman pointed me to hammocks.
Here was a light weight and (I thought) cheaper solution to buying an
expensive backpacking tent.

I was so excited to think I could start backpacking without shelling
out a ton of money. Of course, I had no idea how naive I was. Anyway,
I was only able to talk one of the kids into trying backpacking with
me. Justin is my second son. At the time he was 11. I convinced my
wife this would be a good way for he an I to "bond".

It didn't take me long to first find
[Hennessy Hammock](http://hennessyhammock.com/) and eventually
[HammockForums.net](http://hammockforums.net). I ended up two of the
Hennessy Hammocks and two Osprey packs. I've basically been buying (or
making) two of everything.

Our first trip was to Zaleski State Park in Ohio. We had planned two
nights on an 11 mile loop. We got a late start on a Friday night.
After only a couple miles in, it was dark and we setup camp. It was a
little chilly, but we managed to sleep warm. We got up late. I think
Justin was a little intimidated by the hike. After a little
discussion, we decided to pack it up and go home.

I'll call this trip a success. We got out, into the woods. We slept in
hammocks warmly. Most importantly, we had fun. This was enough to
entice my son to keep going backpacking with me.
